Many machines and robots have got multiple
axis of motion.
An industrial robot typically has six joints
and they have to move smoothly and in a coordinated
fashion.
A technique we can use to help us is linear
interpolation.
Consider this simple function here where x
of s is a function of an initial value of
x and a final value of x.
And, s varies from 0 to 1.
In this case, then, x of s is some sort of
intermediate value.
X of 0 is the initial value, x of 1 is the
final value, and x of 0.5 is halfway in between
the initial and final value.
Now, x could be a vector which makes the multi-dimensional
case quite straightforward.
For instance, it could be the xyz position
of some sort of machine or simple robot.
So, x is a vector with the three elements
xyz and we can interpolate linearly between
an initial position, an initial xyz and a
final xyz.
S is a scalar which varies from 0 to 1.
So, what is s?
Well, S is a scalar that varies smoothly from
0 to 1.
And, if S is a smooth function of time, then
x will be a smooth function of time since
x is simply a linear function of S. We already
know how to make a smoothly varying function
of time.
It can be a polynomial function of time or
it could be a trapezoidal velocity profile
function of time.
Let’s look at a two-dimensional example.
We want to move in the xy plane and I’ve
got a starting point and an ending point.
Now, I want to move in a straight line from
the start to the end.
I’m going to assign some arbitrary coordinates
to the start and the end.
We’re back in MATLAB and now our first point
is a vector, not a scalar.
So, the first point is the coordinate 10,
20, and our last point is a vector 30, 10.
And this time, I’m going to use the function
jtraj, stands for joint interpolated trajectory.
I’m going to move from the first point to
the last point in 50 time steps, and we see
it all scrolling past.
If we scroll back, we see that the first point
has indeed got the vector value of 10 and
20, and the last point has got the value of
30 and 10.
Let’s plot x as a function of time and we
can see here that our first axis has moved
from 10 up to 30, second axis has moved from
20 down to 10.
This function also returns the velocity.
So, I can add that as an extra output argument,
XD.
And now, we see x velocity as well and I can
plot XD versus time, and we can see that the
velocity of each axis starts and ends at 0
and has a finite value in between.
The function also allows me to specify an
initial and final velocity for the trajectory.
So, if I ask for the initial velocity to be
0 which is the default condition, if I ask
for the final velocity to be equal to 10.
Now, if I plot the trajectory versus time,
we can see that at the end of a trajectory,
the slopes of a line are not equal to 0 and
that’s because it is achieving its destination
position at a finite velocity as we specified.
Let’s consider a more complex two-dimensional
example.
I’m going to start and end at this point
in the XY plane.
I’m going to move to this point, this point,
this point, and back to where I started from.
So, there are now three via points.
I can assign some arbitrary coordinates to
these.
In order to move smoothly through the via
points, we need to introduce blends and we
talked about blends in a previous section.
Here, we want to apply this idea of blends
which, in this example, is shown for a scalar
variable x.
We want to apply it to a multi-dimensional
case because now we’re talking about a robot
moving in the xy plane.
So now, each of the positions XI is a vector
rather than a scalar.
Now, we’re going to look at a scenario where
points on the trajectory are vector quantities,
two-vector in this case, and we have via points.
Let’s do this square trajectory in MATLAB.
Our starting coordinate is 40, 50 and the
via points are 60, 30 which is one row of
the matrix, 40, 10 which is another row of
the matrix, 20, 30 and we finish where we
started.
And, that’s the list of via points.
Now, I use the Toolbox function, mstraj.
I pass in the list of via points.
Passing the speed at which we’re going to
move along the path, the time of the segments
is default.
Now, start coordinate.
The time step, 0.1 seconds and the acceleration
time, which I'm going to consider to be just
1 second.
And, I’ve created in the workspace variable
x.
It’s got 435 rows, so that means that the
trajectory took 435 time steps to execute
each time steps 0.1 seconds.
That’s 43.5 second to execute.
I can plot x versus time and we can see the
trajectory of the first and second coordinates
versus time first coordinate shown in blue.
If I plot the first coordinate against the
second coordinate, so that could be the x
coordinate and that could be the y coordinate.
I have a plot like this.
So, this shows the motion of the point on
the xy plane and, indeed, it has the square
profile that we are looking for, but it’s
got rounded corners because we have specified
a finite acceleration time.
Let’s consider now an extra degree of difficulty.
Let’s consider that the machine is capable
of moving at 2 meters a second in the x direction,
but only 1 meter per second in the y direction.
We need to take this in to account when we
figure the trajectory for the robot.
Consider again this two-dimensional example
and this is the path that we want from the
start to the end, that’s our desired path.
But if the robot is capable of moving more
quickly in the x direction than in the y direction,
the path might look something like this.
It will go very, very quickly in the x direction
and also move a little bit in the y direction.
But then, the x-axis will have achieved its
goal, so it will stop moving.
But, the y-axis which is moving more slowly
has to keep on going, and so we end up with
this dogleg path instead of our desired path.
If I was cutting material on something like
a flatbed profiling machine, then I’d be
rather upset if I had this path rather than
the desired one.
So in order to achieve the desired path, we
need to take in to account the velocity of
each of the axes.
We need to work out how long the slowest axis
requires to get to the next via point.
And then, we scale the velocity of the other
axes so that they all arrive at the same time
at the via point, and then they all set off
again to the next via point.
We repeat this process indefinitely.
Now, we’re going to repeat the trajectory,
but this time we are going to specify the
velocities of the axis being different.
So, previously, the velocity was 2 units per
second in the x and y direction.
Now, I’m going to specify a very slow x-axis,
only 1 unit per second, and a fast y-axis.
If we now look at the trajectory level in
our workspace, we see it’s got 835 rows,
0.1 second time step, so that means the trajectory
now takes 83 seconds, almost twice as long.
And, that’s to be expected because, now,
the trajectory is being paced by the slowest
axis.
The slowest axis now can only move at only
1 unit per second.
Previously, it was 2 units per second, so
we are limited now by an axis which is half
the original speed, the trajectory has taken
roughly twice as long to execute.
I can plot x versus time.
We can see the 835 time steps and I can plot
x versus y.